Polish project documentation (#542)
omec-project/upf: README.md

Copyright 2019 Intel Corporation
-->

# upf

[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/omec-project/upf-epc)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/omec-project/upf-epc)

[![Build Status](https://jenkins.onosproject.org/buildStatus/icon?job=bess-upf-linerate-tests&subject=Linerate+Tests)](https://jenkins.onosproject.org/job/bess-upf-linerate-tests/)

> This project implements User Plane Function (UPF) - the 4G/5G mobile user plane compliant with 3GPP TS 23.501. 
> It follows the 3GPP CUPS (Control and User Plane Separation) architecture, making use of the PFCP protocol for the communication between SMF (5G) or SPGW-C (4G) and UPF.
> The UPF implementation is a part of [the Aether platform](https://opennetworking.org/aether/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project implements a 4G/5G User Plane Function (UPF) compliant with 3GPP TS 23.501. It follows the 3GPP Control and User Plane Separation (CUPS_ architecture, making use of the PFCP protocol for the communication between SMF (5G) or SPGW-C (4G) and UPF.
This UPF implementation is actively used as part of [the Aether platform](https://opennetworking.org/aether/) in conjunction with the SD-Core mobile core control plane. 
```

## Overview

![UPF overview](./docs/images/upf-overview.jpg)

The UPF implementation consists of two layers: 

> - **the PFCP Agent** (_pfcpiface_) implements the northbound interface of UPF and exposes the PFCP endpoint to the 4G/5G control plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **PFCP Agent:** (_pfcpiface_) a Go-based implementation of the PFCP northbound API used by the mobile core control plane.
```

> - **fastpath** implements a data plane of UPF. The PFCP Agent implements fastpath plugins that translate the 
>   PFCP semantics to the fastpath-specific data plane configuration. We currently support two fastpath implementations: 
>   - BESS-UPF - the UPF implementation that is build on top of [Berkeley Extensible Software Switch](https://github.com/NetSys/bess/) (BESS) programmable framework.
>     Please see the ONFConnect 2019 [talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqJGWcwcOxE) for more details. You can also see demo videos [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KxK64jalKHw) and [here](https://youtu.be/rWnZuJeUWi4).
>   - [UP4](https://github.com/omec-project/up4) - the open-source P4-based UPF implementation, which is a part of the SD-Fabric project. Note that UP4 and P4-UPF names are exchangeable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Fastpath:** responsible for the actual data plane packet processing.

The PFCP Agent implements fastpath plugins that translate 
  PFCP messages to fastpath-specific configurations. We currently support two fastpath implementations: 
  - BESS: a software-based fastpath built on top of the [Berkeley Extensible Software Switch](https://github.com/NetSys/bess/) (BESS) framework.
    Please see the ONFConnect 2019 [talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqJGWcwcOxE) for more details. You can also see demo videos [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KxK64jalKHw) and [here](https://youtu.be/rWnZuJeUWi4).
  - [UP4](https://github.com/omec-project/up4) - an implementation leveraging ONOS and P4-programmable switches to realize a hardware-based fastpath. 
 
The combination of PFCP Agent and UP4 is usually referred to as P4-UPF. While BESS-UPF denotes the combination of PFCP Agent and the BESS fastpath.
```

> The UPF fastpaths are abstracted via the Fastpath API, which provides the means to communicate with the data plane.
> This design makes the UPF implementation extensible, enabling integration of new UPF fastpaths.
> Note that the PFCP Agent logic (e.g. handling of PFCP messages) is common and does need to be adjusted for new UPF fastpaths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PFCP Agent internally abstracts different fastpaths using a common API, while the different plug-ins can use spcific southbound protocols to communicate with the different fastpath instances. Support for new fastpaths can be provided by implementing new plugins.
```

### Feature List

**PFCP Agent**

> * The northbound PFCP interface including PFCP Association Setup/Release and Heartbeats 
> * Handling of the following PFCP entities: Packet Detection Rules (PDRs), Forwarding Action Rules (FARs),
> QoS Enforcement Rules (QERs).
> * UPF-initiated PFCP association  
> * UPF-based UE IP address assignment
> * Application filtering using the SDF filters
> * Sending of End Marker Packets
> * Downlink Data Notification (DDN) using PFCP Session Report
> * Integration with Prometheus for metrics about PFCP sessions or data plane level metrics. 
> * Application filtering using application PFDs (_**experimental**_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PFCP Association Setup/Release and Heartbeats 
* Session Establishment/Modification with support for PFCP entities such as Packet Detection Rules (PDRs), Forwarding Action Rules (FARs),
QoS Enforcement Rules (QERs).
* UPF-initiated PFCP association  
* UPF-based UE IP address assignment
* Application filtering using SDF filters
* Generation of End Marker Packets
* Downlink Data Notification (DDN) using PFCP Session Report
* Integration with Prometheus for exporting PFCP and data plane-level metrics. 
* Application filtering using application PFDs (_**experimental**_).
```

> **BESS-UPF**

Reviewer 2: What comes to mind are:

- Simple QoS support with slice and session meters
- Per-flow latency and throughout metrics

> **BESS-UPF**

Author: Added.

* IPv4 support
* N3, N4, N6, N9 interfacing
* Single & Multi-port support
* Monitoring/Debugging capabilties using
  - tcpdump on individual BESS modules
  - visualization web interface
  - command line shell interface for displaying statistics
* Static IP routing
* Dynamic IP routing
* Support for IPv4 datagrams reassembly
* Support for IPv4 packets fragmentation
* Support for UE IP NAT
* Service Data Flow (SDF) configuration via N4/PFCP.
* I-UPF/A-UPF ULCL/Branching i.e., simultaneous N6/N9 support within PFCP session
* Downlink Data Notification (DDN) - notification only (no buffering)
* Network Token Functions (_**experimental**_)

**P4-UPF**

P4-UPF implements a core set of features capable of supporting requirements for a broad range of enterprise use cases.
See [the ONF's blog post](https://opennetworking.org/news-and-events/blog/using-p4-and-programmable-switches-to-implement-a-4g-5g-upf-in-aether/) for an overview of P4-UPF. 
Refer to [the SD-Fabric documentation](https://docs.sd-fabric.org/master/index.html) for the detailed feature set.

## Getting started

> The UPF project provides two Docker images: `pfcpiface` (the PFCP Agent) and `bess` (the BESS-based UPF data plane). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository provides code to build two Docker images: `pfcpiface` (the PFCP Agent) and `bess` (the BESS-based fastpath). 
```

To build all Docker images run:

```
make docker-build
```

To build a selected image use `DOCKER_TARGETS`:

```
DOCKER_TARGETS=pfcpiface make docker-build
```

> The latest Docker images are also published in [the OMEC project's Github registry](https://github.com/orgs/omec-project/packages?repo_name=upf).

Reviewer: Let's use the Dopckerhub registry, which is what we use in helm charts

```

To run E2E integration tests for BESS-UPF in the `native` mode use:

```
make test-bess-integration-native
```

> NOTE! The `docker` mode for BESS-UPF and the `native` mode for UP4 are not implemented yet.

**PTF tests for BESS-UPF** verify the BESS-based implementation of the UPF fastpath (data plane). 
Follow the included [README](./ptf/README.md) to run PTF tests for BESS-UPF.

## Contributing

The UPF project welcomes new contributors. Feel free to propose a new feature, integrate a new UPF fastpath or fix bugs!

Before contributing, please follow the below guidelines:

* Check out [open issues](https://github.com/omec-project/upf/issues).
* Check out [the developer guide](./docs/developer-guide.md).
* We follow the best practices described in https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review/developer/. Get familiar with them before submitting a PR.
* Both unit and E2E integration tests must pass on CI. Please make sure that tests are passing with your change (see **Testing** section).

## Support

To report any other kind of problem, feel free to open a GitHub Issue or reach out to the project maintainers on the ONF Community Slack.

## License

> The UPF implementation is licensed under the [Apache License, version 2.0](./LICENSES/Apache-2.0.txt). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project is licensed under the [Apache License, version 2.0](./LICENSES/Apache-2.0.txt). 
```

This UPF implementation is actively used as part of [the Aether platform](https://opennetworking.org/aether/) in conjunction with the SD-Core mobile core control plane. 

## Overview

![UPF overview](./docs/images/upf-overview.jpg)

The UPF implementation consists of two layers: 

- **PFCP Agent:** (_pfcpiface_) a Go-based implementation of the PFCP northbound API used to interact with the mobile core control plane.
- **Fastpath:** responsible for the actual data plane packet processing.

The PFCP Agent implements fastpath plugins that translate 
  PFCP messages to fastpath-specific configurations. We currently support two fastpath implementations: 
  - BESS: a software-based fastpath built on top of the [Berkeley Extensible Software Switch](https://github.com/NetSys/bess/) (BESS) framework.
    Please see the ONFConnect 2019 [talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqJGWcwcOxE) for more details. You can also see demo videos [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KxK64jalKHw) and [here](https://youtu.be/rWnZuJeUWi4).

>   - [UP4](https://github.com/omec-project/up4) - an implementation leveraging ONOS and P4-programmable switches to realize a hardware-based fastpath. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [UP4](https://github.com/omec-project/up4): an implementation leveraging ONOS and P4-programmable switches to realize a hardware-based fastpath. 
```

* Application filtering using application PFDs (_**experimental**_).

**BESS-UPF**

* IPv4 support
* N3, N4, N6, N9 interfacing
* Single & Multi-port support
* Monitoring/Debugging capabilties using
  - tcpdump on individual BESS modules
  - visualization web interface
  - command line shell interface for displaying statistics
* Static IP routing
* Dynamic IP routing
* Support for IPv4 datagrams reassembly
* Support for IPv4 packets fragmentation
* Support for UE IP NAT
* Service Data Flow (SDF) configuration via N4/PFCP.
* I-UPF/A-UPF ULCL/Branching i.e., simultaneous N6/N9 support within PFCP session
* Downlink Data Notification (DDN) - notification only (no buffering)
* Basic QoS support, with per-slice and per-session rate limiting
* Per-flow latency and throughput metrics  
* Network Token Functions (_**experimental**_)

**P4-UPF**

P4-UPF implements a core set of features capable of supporting requirements for a broad range of enterprise use cases.
See [the ONF's blog post](https://opennetworking.org/news-and-events/blog/using-p4-and-programmable-switches-to-implement-a-4g-5g-upf-in-aether/) for an overview of P4-UPF. 

> Refer to [the SD-Fabric documentation](https://docs.sd-fabric.org/master/index.html) for the detailed feature set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to [the SD-Fabric documentation](https://docs.sd-fabric.org/master/advanced/upf.html) for the detailed feature set.
```
